## A Pathway and Network Oriented Approach to Enlighten Molecular Mechanisms of Type 2 Diabetes Using Multiple Association Studies

We analyze three meta-analysis data of GWAS in T2D, using the methodology that we have developed to identify disease-associated pathways by combining nominally significant evidence of genetic association with the known biochemical pathways, protein-protein interaction (PPI) networks, and the functional information of selected SNPs. In this research effort, to enlighten the molecular mechanisms underlying T2D development and progress, we integrated different in-silico approaches that proceed in top-down manner, bottom-up manner and pathway scoring algorithm.
T2D1, T2D2, T2D3 datasets were downloaded from each project’s website. Dataset1(T2D1), T2D genome wide association study (GWAS) data were collected from EGA and dbGaP databases(Bonàs-Guarch et al., 2018). Dataset2(T2D2), A meta-analysis of GWAS in T2D was performed by gathering DIAGRAM, GERA, UKB GWAS datasets of European ancestry(Xue et al., 2018). Dataset3(T2D3), (Mahajan et al., 2018a) collected T2D GWAS datasets from 32 studies.
Protein-protein interaction (PPI) dataset was downloaded from (Ghiassian et al., 2015) and used in the subnetwork process of this study. 
# Methods
To enlighten the molecular mechanisms underlying T2D development and progress, here we integrated different in-silico approaches that proceed in top-down manner, bottom-up manner and pathway scoring algorithm. Via combining nominally significant evidence of genetic association with the known biochemical pathways, PPI networks, and the functional information of selected SNPs, our proposed approach identifies disease-associated pathways.
# Preprocess Gwas data
This summary statistics data includes i) marker name as chromosome and position, ii) effect allele, iii) non-effect allele, and iv) p-value of association. To be able to assess the collective effect of the variants detected in GWAS with mild effects, all variants were filtered using p<0.05 cutoff, as suggested in previous studies.
# Assign rsIDs to variants
While T2D2 dataset provides associated rsIDs of the identified SNPs in the summary statistics data, T2D1 and T2D3 datasets only provide chromosome and position information as marker name of the variants and do not provide associated rsIDs. In this respect, fast and easy variant annotation protocol introduced by (Yang and Wang, 2015) is utilized to assign associated rsIDs to the identified SNPs using hg 19 or hg38 reference genomes, depending on the provided genomic coordinates at T2D1, T2D3 datasets. 
# Map SNPs to Genes
(Lamparter et al., 2016) proposed a fast and efficient methodology, Pascal, that calculates gene scores by aggregating SNP p-values from a GWAS meta-analysis (without the need for individual genotypes), while correcting for LD structure. Pascal only requires SNP-phenotype association summary statistics and do not require genotype data. Hence, we utilized this tool in our study to map SNPs into genes. 
# Top-down Approach
In this method, firstly a scoring function is defined for each subnetwork and then the problem turned into a search problem of a subnetwork, which maximizes this score. Once the subnetwork score is defined, greedy approach, genetic algorithm, and simulated annealing are popular search strategies in active subnetwork identification methodologies. In this study, greedy approach is used during the search steps of the algorithm, and the subnetwork score cutoff is chosen as 3, as suggested in the original paper (Ideker et al., 2002) to select biologically meaningful subnetworks.
# Find subnetworks
For all datasets, the genes and their significance levels are mapped to protein-protein interaction network and 983, 903, 940 and 813 active protein subnetworks are identified for T2D1, T2D2, T2D3 and T2DC datasets, respectively. While most of the subnetworks include 175-250 genes in T2D1 and T2D2 datasets, most of the subnetworks detected for T2DC dataset include 200-250 genes. Around two third of the subnetworks identified for T2D3 dataset, include 150-175 genes. For each identified subnetwork, functional enrichment analysis is carried out and hence, affected pathways are determined.
# Find affected pathway subnetworks and pathway clusters
To be able to utilize the interrelated structure of the pathways, we proposed to apply subnetwork identification methodologies on the generated pathway networks, hence disease related affected pathway subnetworks could be identified. We hypothesized that similar to the dysregulated modules of proteins, dysregulated modules of pathways have a role in disease development mechanisms. Instead of a PPI network, this method requires a pathway network as the baseline. To be able to utilize the interrelated structure of the pathways, we proposed to apply subnetwork identification methodologies on the generated pathway networks, hence disease related affected pathway subnetworks could be identified.
# Functional Enrichment
Functional enrichment analysis focuses on interconnection of terms and functional groups in networks to predict affected pathways for the interested disease. Hyper geometric test and correction methods such as Bonferroni and Benjamini-Hoschberg are used for analyses. In this study, ClueGO (Bindea et al., 2009) is utilized for enrichment analysis. KEGG biological pathways are used as reference pathways.
# Bottom-up Approach 
Based on the idea that the disease-related proteins do not concentrate in a specific region, studies focus on the estimation of dysregulated modules by using the degree of affected nodes information and edges (protein interaction). (Ghiassian et al., 2015) et. al. proposed DIseAse MOdule Detection (DIAMOnD) algorithm that finds out dysregulated modules by adding other possible proteins around the known disease protein clusters. Based on random walking, a defined walker starts from a random seed protein and moves through other nodes along the connections of the network. It is hypothesized that more frequently visited proteins are closer to seed proteins (proteins that are known to be associated with the disease).
# Pathway Scoring Algorithm
In this regard, Pascal (Pathway scoring algorithm) is a robust tool to calculate gene and pathway scores from SNP-phenotype association summary statistics (Lamparter et al., 2016). It does not require genotype data. Firstly, they calculate gene scores by aggregating SNP p-values from a GWAS meta-analysis, and also by correcting for Linkage disequilibrium (LD) structure. While computing the gene scores, they compared the effect of using the sum of chi-squared statistics (average association signals per gene) with the effect of using max of chi-squared statistics (strongest association signals per gene) (Lamparter et al., 2016). Secondly, they calculate pathway scores via aggregating the scores of genes that belong to the same pathways by using modified Fisher method (Lamparter et al., 2016).
# References 
https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.01.14.905547v1.full
Mahajan, A., Taliun, D., Thurner, M., Robertson, N. R., Torres, J. M., Rayner, N. W., et al. (2018a). Fine-mapping type 2 diabetes loci to single-variant resolution using high-density imputation and islet-specific epigenome maps. Nat. Genet. 50, 1505–1513. doi:10.1038/s41588-018-0241-6.
Bonàs-Guarch, S., Guindo-Martínez, M., Miguel-Escalada, I., Grarup, N., Sebastian, D., Rodriguez-Fos, E., et al. (2018). Re-analysis of public genetic data reveals a rare X-chromosomal variant associated with type 2 diabetes. Nat. Commun. 9, 321. doi:10.1038/s41467-017-02380-9.
Xue, A., Wu, Y., Zhu, Z., Zhang, F., Kemper, K. E., Zheng, Z., et al. (2018). Genome-wide association analyses identify 143 risk variants and putative regulatory mechanisms for type 2 diabetes. Nat. Commun. 9, 2941. doi:10.1038/s41467-018-04951-w.
Ghiassian, S. D., Menche, J., and Barabási, A. L. (2015). A DIseAse MOdule Detection (DIAMOnD) Algorithm Derived from a Systematic Analysis of Connectivity Patterns of Disease Proteins in the Human Interactome. PLoS Comput. Biol. 11, 1–21. doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004120.
Lamparter, D., Marbach, D., Rueedi, R., Kutalik, Z., and Bergmann, S. (2016). Fast and Rigorous Computation of Gene and Pathway Scores from SNP-Based Summary Statistics. PLOS Comput. Biol. 12, e1004714. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004714.
Yang, H., and Wang, K. (2015). Genomic variant annotation and prioritization with ANNOVAR and wANNOVAR. Nat. Protoc. 10, 1556–1566. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2015.105.
Bindea, G., Mlecnik, B., Hackl, H., Charoentong, P., Tosolini, M., Kirilovsky, A., et al. (2009). ClueGO: a Cytoscape plug-in to decipher functionally grouped gene ontology and pathway annotation networks. Bioinformatics 25, 1091–1093. doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp101
Ideker, T., Ozier, O., Schwikowski, B., and Siegel, A. F. (2002). Discovering regulatory and signalling circuits in molecular interaction networks. Bioinformatics 18, 233–240. doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/18.suppl_1.S233.


 
